Rephrase implied discrete-valued equation rule as non-normative observation (#2907)
modelica/ModelicaSpecification: chapters/operatorsandexpressions.tex

  discrete-time expression.
\end{itemize}

\begin{example}
The (underdetermined) model \lstinline!Test! below illustrates two kinds of consequences due to variability constraints.
First, it contains variability errors for declaration equations and assignments.
Second, it illustrates the impact of variability on the matching of equations to variables, which can lead to violation of the perfect matching rule.
Details of how variabilities are determined are given in the sections below.
\begin{lstlisting}[language=modelica]
model Constants
  parameter Real p1 = 1;
  constant Real c1 = p1 + 2; // error, not a constant expression
  parameter Real p2 = p1 + 2; // fine
end Constants;
model Test
  Constants c1(p1=3); // fine
  Constants c2(p2=7); // fine, declaration equation can be modified
  Real x;
  Boolean b1 = noEvent(x > 1); // error, since b1 is a discrete-time variable
                               // and noEvent(x > 1) is not discrete-time.
  Boolean b2;
  Integer i1;
  Integer i2;
algorithm
  i1 := x; // error, assignment to variable of lesser variability.
equation

>   b2 = noEvent(x > 1); // no variability error, but equation cannot be matched.

Reviewer: This should now reference the rule on line 1501, and not just mention matching.

Author: OK, fixed.  This equations can be rejected for more than one reason, and the rule is now referenced by giving it the name the _discrete-valued equation variability rule_.

algorithm
  i1 := x; // Error, assignment to variable of lesser variability.
equation
  /* The equation below can be rejected for two reasons:
   * 1. Discrete-valued equation variability rule requires both sides to be
   *    discrete-time.

>    * 2. Violates perfect matching rule, as no variable can be solved with

Reviewer 2: Should it be "It violates..."? The reason 1 is given as a self-contained sentence.

functions do not become active between events.
\end{nonnormative}

For a scalar equation \lstinline!expr1 = expr2! where neither expression is of base type \lstinline!Real!, both expressions must be discrete-time expressions.

> 

Reviewer: Should restore:
```suggestion
For record
equations the equation is split into basic types before applying this
test.
```

Author: I tried something similar, but with a formulation that is more in the style of the first sentence, and referring to this as a _rule_ rather than a _test_ for consistency with the non-normative text below:
> For a record equation, the same rule applies to the scalar elements of the equation.

functions do not become active between events.
\end{nonnormative}

> For a scalar equation \lstinline!expr1 = expr2! where neither expression is of base type \lstinline!Real!, both expressions must be discrete-time expressions.

Reviewer: An additional minor point to restore:
```suggestion
For an equation \lstinline!expr1 = expr2! where neither expression is of base type \lstinline!Real!, both expressions must be discrete-time expressions.
```
The reason is that we don't want to unnecessarily for scalarization.

Reviewer 2: I agree that it is better to say "an equation" instead of "a scalar equation". If I see "a scalar equation" I immediately have a question of what happens to an array equation. So at the very least I would say we need to say that for array equations this rule is applied after they were expanded into scalar equation. But then there is also the point Hans made that it would force scalarization.

Author: The point of writing it this way is that we start with the simple case, before turning to record and arrays.  So far, the rule doesn't say anything regarding record or array equations, and there is no suggestion to scalarize.  (To be continued in the conversation below.)

Author: This now reads:
```
For a scalar or array equation \lstinline!expr1 = expr2! where neither expression is of base type \lstinline!Real!, both expressions must be discrete-time expressions.
```

OK to resolve?

Reviewer 2: Looks good to me. @HansOlsson?

Reviewer: Yes.

> For a record equation, the same rule applies to the scalar elements of the equation.

Reviewer: And similarly
```suggestion
For a record equation, the same rule applies to the non-record elements of the equation.
```

Reviewer 2: I prefer the original version that said the record is first split into basic types. Either "scalar" or "non-record elements" to me leave questions about what happens to arrays or subrecords. Was there something wrong with the original formulation?

Author: One problem I saw with "basic types" is that _basic type_ doesn't seem to be an established concept.

Note that giving a rule for the scalar elements of the equation solves the problem of what happens to sub-records.  Alternatively, a formulation with _the rule applies recursively_ should take care of any sub-records.

However, the problem to solve first is probably to just make sure that we agree on what the rule should say for array equations.  Consider these equations:
```
  Boolean x;
  Boolean y;
equation
  /* Equation a: */
  {x, y} = {time > 0.5, time > 0.6};
  /* Equation b: */
  {x, y} = {noEvent(time > 0.5), time > 0.6};
  /* Equation c: */
  {x, y} = noEvent({time > 0.5, time > 0.6});
```

I suppose the intention is that the rule operates on the entire LHS and RHS arrays?  That is, the variability of the LHS is discrete-time in all equations, but only (a) has a discrete-time RHS and satisfies the rule.

For my own sake, I'll also include the record variant for clarity:
```
record R
  Boolean x;
  Real y;
end R;

  R r;
equation
  /* Equation a: */
  r = R(time > 0.5, time);
  /* Equation b: */
  r = R(noEvent(time > 0.5), time);
  /* Equation c: */
  r = noEvent(R(time > 0.5, time));
```

Here, the fact that the entire RHS is continuous-time in all cases doesn't violate the rule; each record member needs to be considered separately.  But what if the RHS is given by an intricate function?
```
function foo
  input Boolean p;
  input Real t;
  output R r;
algorithm
  /* Complicated mess. */
end foo;

  /* Equation d: */
  r = foo(time > 0.5, time);
```

One advantage of presenting the rule non-normatively and instead show how it can be inferred is that we wouldn't have to go into details like this here; it would be sufficient to let the other parts of the specification define when `r.x` is considered solvable in the equation.

Reviewer: > One problem I saw with "basic types" is that _basic type_ doesn't seem to be an established concept.
> 
> Note that giving a rule for the scalar elements of the equation solves the problem of what happens to sub-records. Alternatively, a formulation with _the rule applies recursively_ should take care of any sub-records.

Yes, that seems fine.

> However, the problem to solve first is probably to just make sure that we agree on what the rule should say for array equations. Consider these equations:
> 
> ```
>   Boolean x;
>   Boolean y;
> equation
>   /* Equation a: */
>   {x, y} = {time > 0.5, time > 0.6};
>   /* Equation b: */
>   {x, y} = {noEvent(time > 0.5), time > 0.6};
>   /* Equation c: */
>   {x, y} = noEvent({time > 0.5, time > 0.6});
> ```
> 
> I suppose the intention is that the rule operates on the entire LHS and RHS arrays? That is, the variability of the LHS is discrete-time in all equations, but only (a) has a discrete-time RHS and satisfies the rule.

Yes, arrays seen as one entity, because arrays need to be homogenous. 
Similarly as the entire RHS is Real below (and thus this example is illegal):
```
  Real x;
  Integer y;
equation
{x,y}={time,2};
```
Whereas records members are different.

> For my own sake, I'll also include the record variant for clarity:
> 
> ```
> record R
>   Boolean x;
>   Real y;
> end R;
> 
>   R r;
> equation
>   /* Equation a: */
>   r = R(time > 0.5, time);
>   /* Equation b: */
>   r = R(noEvent(time > 0.5), time);
>   /* Equation c: */
>   r = noEvent(R(time > 0.5, time));
> ```
> 
> Here, the fact that the entire RHS is continuous-time in all cases doesn't violate the rule; each record member needs to be considered separately. But what if the RHS is given by an intricate function?

That is more complicated, but any function call will only return a discrete-time valued expression if all inputs are discrete-time valued expression; and thus a record with non-Reals returned by a function called with non discrete-time expression will not work as rhs.

Author: > Yes, arrays seen as one entity, because arrays need to be homogenous.
> Similarly as the entire RHS is Real below (and thus this example is illegal):

OK, that's a good example pinpointing something I've missed.

> That is more complicated, but any function call will only return a discrete-time valued expression if all inputs are discrete-time valued expression; and thus a record with non-Reals returned by a function called with non discrete-time expression will not work as rhs.

Does this mean that a record constructor is not considered a function in this sense – that a record returned by a non-constructor function has a variability (determined from the function arguments), whereas a record constructor expression doesn't have a variability?

Author: It's been change to _non-record_ now, and I've also tried to elaborate what's going on in the non-normative text.  Maybe we can restart the discussion based on the new non-normative text?

I also added a new example, and moved the existing example out of the discrete-time-specific section.

Author: It seems this conversation is becoming obsolete in view of separate comments on this issue further down.  Maybe it's time to resolve, and if needed restart based on the current formulations?

Reviewer 2: I think this is now outdated and can be resolved. Resolving.

functions do not become active between events.
\end{nonnormative}

For a scalar or array equation \lstinline!expr1 = expr2! where neither expression is of base type \lstinline!Real!, both expressions must be discrete-time expressions.

> For a record equation, the same rule applies to the non-record elements of the equation.

Author: I guess _primitive components_ should be related to _primitive type_; from 9.2:
> The primitive elements are of simple types or…

Here, _simple type_ is clearly defined as a non-array type; from 
4.5.2:
> a _simple type_ (`Real`, `Boolean`, `Integer`, `String` and enumeration types)

Hence, I don't think using _primitive elements_ here would be the right term, as we want a term that also includes arrays.

> For a record equation, the same rule applies to the non-record elements of the equation.

Author: @eshmoylova, do you agree that _primitive elements_ isn't the right term here?  Can we resolve this conversation?

> For a record equation, the same rule applies to the non-record elements of the equation.

Author: OK, I've changed it to a recursive formulation instead.  Based on what I found in the rest of the document, I believe that _components of the record_ should be sufficient (no need for _sub-_).

(By the way, we also have some usage of _record component_, which I find confusing, as it sounds more like a component that is a record, than a component of a record.  The PR used to use the term _record member_ which doesn't have this ambiguity, but I changed it to _component of the record_ when I realized that the current text doesn't say _members_ about the components of a record.)

> For a record equation, the same rule applies to the non-record elements of the equation.

Reviewer 2: Looks good. Resolving.
